
# [Mutation-based analysis of the CoV-2 Spike protein dynamic profile](https://github.com/nataliateruel/teste_dms/blob/main/Progress_Report.pdf)
Teruel, NFB

## Abstract
The coronavirus pandemic has emerged as a significant and urgent issue for health sciences to overcome. The infection process and the antibodies recognition of the virus and the pharmaceutical advances on vaccines target mostly one of its proteins, the Spike glycoprotein. The entry receptor for SARS-CoV-2 is the human cell-surface protein angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), as well as for other lineages of human coronaviruses. It makes the Spike protein a critical study subject to understand SARS-CoV evolution. Spike and ACE2 binding rely on Spike to be on its the open conformation, in which its Receptor Binding Domains (RBDs) are open. This fact leads us to think about the possibility of Spike's dynamics to be relevant to virulence.
Following this scientific hypothesis, our research aims to understand dynamic patterns for known coronavirus strains and mutants and associate them with infection data, both epidemiological and experimental. Through optimized computational tools, we want to engineer possible lineages of Spike and predict their associated virulence.
Protein engineering is the conception of new polypeptides through chemical modifications for several applications. Synthetic protein structures and functions can be designed by computational approaches that have been used to identify mutations that change ligand-binding affinity, function, and stability. Previously, the Najmanovich group has developed the normal mode analysis (NMA) method ENCoM, an Elastic Network Contact Model that employs a potential energy function that includes a pairwise atom-type non-bonded interaction term and thus makes it possible to consider the effect of the specific nature of amino-acids on dynamics. NMA methods can be used to explore protein vibrations around an equilibrium conformation by calculating the eigenvectors and eigenvalues associated with different normal modes. ENCoM performs better than existing NMA methods with respect to traditional NMA methods applications and was the first to predict the effect of mutations on protein stability and function.
Normal mode calculation allows us to evaluate the B-factors associated with the protein structure to understand protein flexibility or rigidity for each residue that constitutes it. Therefore, it allows us to understand, for example, the dynamic impairments of mutations in the opening of the RBD. As a computational tool, this approach has the advantages of saving the money associated with infrastructure, reagents, and human resources for experimental approaches while using the increasing amount of available scientific data to select the best experimental validation candidates. Compared to other computational techniques to evaluate protein dynamics, NMA proves to be an excellent option to analyze large datasets, being computationally less expensive than simulations like Molecular Dynamics.
The data from the COVID-19 Viral Genome Analysis Pipeline, enabled by data from GISAID, allowed us access to all sequenced lineages of SARS-CoV-2. We performed the dynamic profile calculations for all the lineages inducing simulated mutations to published structures for Spike closed state and one open RBD state. When clustering these profiles, we could see that the D614G lineage induced the most relevant dynamic change between all mutations already found in nature. This observation occurred concurrently with the epidemiological advance of this specific lineage. Comparing experimental data of cell infection rates for different lineages, especially SARS-CoV-2 D614G and SARS-CoV, we could see some patterns that suggested that virulence was associated with the flexibility of RBDs in the closed state and the rigidity of these domains when in the open conformation. It would, therefore, explain virulence by favouring the occupancy of the open conformation. Some experimental data reinforcing this hypothesis were recently published, showing that the occupancy is indeed shifted towards open conformations in the occurrence of the D614G mutation and that it seems to be the explanation for the increased virulence. Among others, these two examples show that our computational approaches are consistently keeping up with new experimental observations.

## What data is shown here?

Currently, we are working on predicting the next dangerous lineages based on the observed dynamic patterns associated with virulence. Thirty-four thousand two hundred single mutation structures for the closed state and the one open RBD state were already generated and analyzed to find potential candidates.

The results for every calculation of dSvib for the closed and the open conformations are available here, as well as the difference between the deltas. In the first graph you can choose to look, for each site, at the median, maximum or minimum value between all 20 differences between deltas, for the WT (zero) and other 19 possible mutations. According to the hypothesis that we presented, the higher values of diff_delta represent the most virulent candidates and the lower values of diff_delta represent the least virulent candidates.
